02-scripts.md, before:

---
layout: documentation-post
title: Scripts
permalink: /scripts/
hidden_title: Stalfos JavaScript documentation 
---

Stalfos provides you with a basic JavaScript system that aims to help you write modular jQuery based code for your website. 

With an [app delegate](#app-delegate) sitting in the middle of your modules - writing code that only runs when you need it, without having to write nasty display logic is made easier with Stalfos.

## App Delegate

The app delegate is designed to look for elements on your page with a `data-module` attribute. In this attribute you should add an identifier for which module(s) you wish to bind this element. The app delegate with then run a switch on the module(s) and bind to modules accordingly.

### Module Binding Example

#### HTML
```html
{% include samples/scripts/app-delegate/html.html %}
```

#### app.js module binding
```javascript
{% include samples/scripts/app-delegate/app.js %}
```

#### example-module.js
```js
{% include samples/scripts/app-delegate/example-module.js %}
```

## Helpers

In your `scripts` directory, you will see `_helpers.js`. This is a collection of little functions that should help you out.

### Any

A very simple snippet that will return `true` if a jQuery collection has any items in it.

```javascript
{% include samples/scripts/helpers/any.js %}
```

### Parse Settings

This will try and parse inline JSON as an object literal. Make sure you use the `data-settings` attribute to store your JSON.

#### HTML
```html
{% include samples/scripts/helpers/parse-settings.html %}
```


#### JavaScript
```javascript
{% include samples/scripts/helpers/parse-settings.js %}
```

### AJAX Request

AJAX Request is a wrapper for the [jQuery AJAX method](http://api.jquery.com/jquery.ajax/). It helps you by predictably returning a callback while doing the hard work for you. 

```javascript
{% include samples/scripts/helpers/ajax-request.js %}
```

### AJAX HTML

AJAX HTML is a wrapper for [AJAX Request](#ajax-request) that pre-overrides the `dataType` and `callback` for you to predictably call for HTML from an endpoint.

```javascript
{% include samples/scripts/helpers/ajax-html.js %}
```

### Query String

Query string helps you by either converting the browser's current query string to JSON or converting a JSON object to a query string. 

#### To JSON

```javascript
{% include samples/scripts/helpers/query-string-to-json.js %}
```

#### From JSON

```javascript
{% include samples/scripts/helpers/query-string-from-json.js %}
```

### ESC

ESC simply provides you with the ability to bind events to the escape key. It's useful little tool for making your interactive elements accessible. 

```javascript
{% include samples/scripts/helpers/esc.js %}
```

### Get Breakpoint

This little helper returns the current breakpoint which is set in your [CSS](/css/). The return value is the same as your SCSS variable name to keep things as simple as possible. 

This should help you avoid user agent string querying, which we all know is nasty! 

```javascript
{% include samples/scripts/helpers/get-breakpoint.js %}
```

### Change Event

This helper is aimed at generating a change event for your form elements. Some of the input based elements require an `input` event instead of `change` and this helper sorts that for you.

```javascript
{% include samples/scripts/helpers/change-event.js %}
```

### Debounce

"Borrowed" from [David Walsh's blog](http://davidwalsh.name/javascript-debounce-function). This function helps debounce events such as `resize` which can fire a crazy amount of times.

```javascript
{% include samples/scripts/helpers/debounce.js %}
```


* TOC
{:toc}
{: .is-hidden--text.js-page__table-of-contents-source }

Commit message:

Add typeSet to the docs

02-scripts.md, after:

---
layout: documentation-post
title: Scripts
permalink: /scripts/
hidden_title: Stalfos JavaScript documentation 
---

Stalfos provides you with a basic JavaScript system that aims to help you write modular jQuery based code for your website. 

With an [app delegate](#app-delegate) sitting in the middle of your modules - writing code that only runs when you need it, without having to write nasty display logic is made easier with Stalfos.

## App Delegate

The app delegate is designed to look for elements on your page with a `data-module` attribute. In this attribute you should add an identifier for which module(s) you wish to bind this element. The app delegate will then run a switch on the ID(s) and bind your element to modules accordingly.

### Module Binding Example

#### HTML
```html
{% include samples/scripts/app-delegate/html.html %}
```

#### app.js module binding
```javascript
{% include samples/scripts/app-delegate/app.js %}
```

#### example-module.js
```js
{% include samples/scripts/app-delegate/example-module.js %}
```

## Typset 

By default, there's a module called `typeSet` in your project's `module` directory. This silent module will automatically go through your text and add `&nbsp;` where appropriate to help prevent orphans and widows.

This can be prevented by adding the `js-typeset__ignore` class to your element. This will affect all child elements too.

You can globally prevent it by setting `settings.typeset.enabled = false` in `app.js`.

### Example 

Here's an example of typeSet being prevented on a `nav` element.

```html
{% include samples/scripts/modules/type-set.html %}
```

## Helpers

In your `scripts` directory, you will see `_helpers.js`. This is a collection of little functions that should help you out.

### Any

A very simple snippet that will return `true` if a jQuery collection has any items in it.

```javascript
{% include samples/scripts/helpers/any.js %}
```

### Parse Settings

This will try and parse inline JSON as an object literal. Make sure you use the `data-settings` attribute to store your JSON.

#### HTML
```html
{% include samples/scripts/helpers/parse-settings.html %}
```


#### JavaScript
```javascript
{% include samples/scripts/helpers/parse-settings.js %}
```

### AJAX Request

AJAX Request is a wrapper for the [jQuery AJAX method](http://api.jquery.com/jquery.ajax/). It helps you by predictably returning a callback while doing the hard work for you. 

```javascript
{% include samples/scripts/helpers/ajax-request.js %}
```

### AJAX HTML

AJAX HTML is a wrapper for [AJAX Request](#ajax-request) that pre-overrides the `dataType` and `callback` for you to predictably call for HTML from an endpoint.

```javascript
{% include samples/scripts/helpers/ajax-html.js %}
```

### Query String

Query string helps you by either converting the browser's current query string to JSON or converting a JSON object to a query string. 

#### To JSON

```javascript
{% include samples/scripts/helpers/query-string-to-json.js %}
```

#### From JSON

```javascript
{% include samples/scripts/helpers/query-string-from-json.js %}
```

### ESC

ESC simply provides you with the ability to bind events to the escape key. It's useful little tool for making your interactive elements accessible. 

```javascript
{% include samples/scripts/helpers/esc.js %}
```

### Get Breakpoint

This little helper returns the current breakpoint which is set in your [CSS](/css/). The return value is the same as your SCSS variable name to keep things as simple as possible. 

This should help you avoid user agent string querying, which we all know is nasty! 

```javascript
{% include samples/scripts/helpers/get-breakpoint.js %}
```

### Change Event

This helper is aimed at generating a change event for your form elements. Some of the input based elements require an `input` event instead of `change` and this helper sorts that for you.

```javascript
{% include samples/scripts/helpers/change-event.js %}
```

### Debounce

"Borrowed" from [David Walsh's blog](http://davidwalsh.name/javascript-debounce-function), this function helps debounce events such as `resize` which can fire a crazy amount of times.

```javascript
{% include samples/scripts/helpers/debounce.js %}
```


* TOC
{:toc}
{: .is-hidden--text.js-page__table-of-contents-source }
